So we have this concept of the stack
like we've been talking about before.
And it's this series of bytes
just like everything else.
But there's the separate region
of memory called the heap,
which has its own sequence of bytes.
And basically, they're just used for
different purposes.
The stack is used for all the function
calling things we've been talking about.
Where we pass arguments around, and
the stack gets bigger as you call more and
more nested functions, and then it gets
smaller as those functions return.
The heap has nothing to
do with function calling.
It's just as big bucket of space.
And basically, it's used as sort
of like a helper for the stack.
So things that are running on
the stack can use the heap for
sort of like separate storage and use
the fact that it doesn't play by the same
rules as the stack to give
a little bit more flexibility.
So this VecMetadata struct is
gonna live on the stack, but
first_elem_index is actually
going to be index into the heap.
So for example, let's say I said
let nums equals vec [ 1, 2, 3 ].
So I'm making a vector of three numbers.
Basically, this first elem index,
this use size right here is going
to refer to the first open slot.
The first open index that
the russ like runtime system
figured out is available to store this 1,
2, and 3.
So let's say that this bookkeeping
system when we run this vec macro,
it says okay, I need to find enough
room for three elements in this vec.
These are gonna be u8s.
Does anyone have, anywhere in the heap can
I find three places, three u8s in a row.
And someplace to store them.
And maybe the bookkeeping
system comes back and says,
I found that there's three
available right here at slot 2.
Maybe you could have said zero, could have
said seven, but it happened to say, okay,
I found enough space for them right here.
So that means that this two is gonna go
into this VecMetadata struct saying this
is where the elements begin.
And then the length is going to refer
to the length of the vector, so
it's gonna say three.
So that's gonna be, the first
element is gonna be at index two.
And then because the length is three, we
know it's gonna be these three elements,
right here are the three elements
that are representing the vec,
those three are stored on the heap.
And again,
we'll get back to capacity later.
So with these two combined,
we can say, okay, great.
We know we have enough length for
this, we've stored the length.
This is what's gonna get returned
when we call the length method.
And then we also know where to put them.
So we say great, put the one here,
put the two there and put the three there.
Everything is good.
So now we have successfully
stored our data and
we now have this thing that we
can pass around on the stack.
Which gives us a way to go
look that data up on the heap.
So how then say nums.push(85).
Well, hopefully that's no problem,
I can just say I'll just bump
the length up from three to four.
First_elem_index doesn't change,
that stays at 2,
because that's still the index
of our first element.
All that happens is we go and write
this 85 into that next piece of memory.
No problem.
But there's at least a potential problem
that can happen here that can't really
happen on the stack.
This gets into sort of
the downside of the heap.
We've got this bookkeeping system, and
it told us that there were
three slots available here.
Now if we get lucky when we call push,
there's a fourth slot
available right here.
If so, great, we can just write our
85 there, increase the length by 1,
everything's fine.
But what happens if we then
push another number like 29 and
the bookkeeping system says actually,
sorry, this is in use, like somebody else.
Some other function was doing another
vec somewhere, and I actually told it,
it was okay to store a vec here so,
this is in use.
And if you try to put your 29 there,
it's gonna overwrite some other 4
vecs first element, that's no good.
We don't want that to happen.
So what do we do if this happens?
If the bookkeeping system says,
yeah, I'm sorry,
you can't put something there because it's
in use by somebody else, what do you do?
Well, unfortunately, in that case,
basically what we need to do is
we need to go back and redo it.
We need to say, find a new spot,
I now need to need when we
went back earlier and said.
Hey, bookkeeping system, can you
find me three consecutive elements?
Now I can do that again, except this time
we need to find five consecutive elements.
We need to say yeah, can you find me
five consecutive elements anywhere in
the heap and I'm gonna go and
copy every single one of my elements.
I copy the one over into that,
the two over into that,
the three over that, 85 over that.
Update my first elem index.
And then I can finally
push the 29 in over there.
Now of course, you can imagine what if we
happen to find a slot that was exactly
five elements long and then there happens
to be something else right after that.
We could get unlucky again,
if we call push again, and
it might need to do that whole
copying dance all over again.
This can get really expensive and
really performance intensive,
which is why we have this capacity thing.
So capacity is basically a way that lets
us prevent this problem from happening or
at least reduce the chances
of it happening.
So basically, instead of saying
let nums = vec [ 1, 2, 3 ].
If we call it Vec : : with_capacity(5),
what that saying is basically, I
want you to give me back a new VecMetadata
struct where the first elem index is
pointing to something that has at least
five slots open, like five elements open.
Not even using them, yet
necessarily I'm gonna go through and
use push to populate it later.
But this I'm saying, I want upfront
to say please make sure that I have
enough room to store five
elements inside this vec.
And so you can use this as this is
considered a good sort of a best practice.
You can use this as a way to minimize
the incidence of needing to do that really
expensive copying over because after
you did a bunch of pushes you ran
out of space.
So if you anticipate wanting to call
push on a vec a number of times.
Try to call with capacity ahead of time
to make sure that you have enough room.
Okay, so revising our sort
of previous mental model,
we still have first element x being
the same thing but the capacity,
not the length is actually what determines
how many total slots we're taking up.
Length is just how many slots
we are currently taking up.
But as far as memory goes, capacity
is really what determines the total
number of slots that we have
available to push things into.
So if our length is less than our
capacity, like if we have a capacity of
five, and we've only got three
elements in there, that tells us okay,
it's fine to just go ahead and push up to
two more things in there before we might
potentially need to find a new home for
this thing and move it over.
Okay, now in contrast,
remember we saw earlier,
our example of an array with three
elements, like it just [u8; 3].
I mean, how does this work?
Well, just goes on the stack because we
know how big it is than compile to nine.
So, I know this is like kind of
a long winded explanation here, but
it really does illustrate, like just how
vastly more complicated vec is than array.
Just because its sizes dynamic.
There's just so much more going on
that has to be taken into account.
There's that whole bookkeeping system,
which is not trivial.
That's its own whole source of complexity.
Also the bookkeeping system, depending on
how long you're program has been running
and what kind of data is
been running through it.
It can actually take it potentially quite
a long time to come back with an answer of
like where it found space on the heap for
doing things.
So sort of the moral of the story is,
yeah, the heap is more flexible.
It does let you get this sort of dynamism.
It lets you have things that don't
really necessarily work on the stack,
like being able to return a vec
that has sort of a dynamic length.
But that comes at a serious cost of
complexity, and especially a performance.
And so when we talk about some of these
rusts specific features like the bar
checker and stuff like that, really all
of those things turn out to be dealing
with the heap and trying to efficiently
manage all the complexity that comes
with it without sacrificing performance.
Okay, so to sum up,
we talked about vectors versus arrays.
Arrays have this sort of hard coded size.
And although that's inconvenient, it
does mean that it's very straightforward
to pass arrays around on the stack because
they work just like tuples and structs.
There's nothing complicated about them.
Vectors do let you have a variable
lengths, you can push stuff onto them,
you can pop them off.
But that means that we can't actually
store the entire veck on the stack because
we don't know how much space to like
pre allocate for return values and
things like that.
So arrays can be stack
allocated whereas vectors
have to be heap allocated
because they're dynamic length.
And as previously mentioned, what we
will see in future sections is that,
this trade off sort of sets the stage for
the number one biggest factor in
programming language performance.